Pod priority based graceful node shutdown (#2713)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/2712-pod-priority-based-graceful-node-shutdown/README.md

[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Kubelet graceful shutdown should take the pod priority values into account to
determine the order in which the pods are stopped.

## Motivation

The [node graceful shutdown KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2000-graceful-node-shutdown) added support to the kubelet to detect
that a node is shutting down and making sure that the pods are gracefully
stopped before allowing the shutdown to proceed. 

The feature added flags to specify the total time for shutdown and the
time to reserve for shutting down critical pods.

However, there is a need to allow more fine grained control over the
pod shutdown order beyond _critical_ and _regular_ pods.

Also, in general, kubernetes API design discourages hard coding anything by instances
of name. 

Instead of looking at the pod priority class names, we can instead
look at the pod priority class values to allow more control over pod
shutdown order.

### Goals

*   Make the kubelet use shutdown configuration based on pod priority values for
    graceful shutdown.

> ### Non-Goals

Author: done

|------------------------|---------------|
| 100000                 |300 seconds    |
| 10000                  |180 seconds    |
| 1000                   |120 seconds    |
| 0                      |60 seconds     |

The above table implies that any pod with priority value >= 100000 will get
300 seconds to stop, any pod with value >= 10000 and < 100000 will get 180
seconds to stop, any pod with value >= 1000 and < 10000 will get 120 seconds to stop. 
Finally, all other pods will get 60 seconds to stop.

Note: We use priority values instead of names because k8s API design discourages
using names and the values are more portable as well.

One doesn't have to specify values corresponding to all of the classes. For
e.g. the config could also be

|Pod priority class value|Shutdown period|
|------------------------|---------------|
| 100000                 |300 seconds    |
| 1000                   |120 seconds    |
| 0                      |60 seconds     |

In the above case, the pods with custom-class-b will go into the same bucket
as custom-class-c for shutdown.

If there are no pods in a particular range, then the kubelet will skip
over the range entirely.

> If this feature is enabled and no configuration is provided, then no ordering

Reviewer: can you specify what min systemd version is required for this?

action will be taken. The rationale is to allow some users to opt out of this
if they are on a non-systemd distribution or have an older version of systemd
with which this feature won't work.

### Migration from the Node graceful shutdown feature

If a user configures `ShutdownGracePeriod` to 5 minutes and `ShutdownGracePeriodCriticalPods`
to 3 minutes, then it could be migrated to:

|Pod priority class value|Shutdown period|
|------------------------|---------------|
| 1000000001             |180 seconds    |
| 0                      |120 seconds    |

Kubelet will be modified to only work with the config proposed in this KEP or the
Node shutdown KEP. If both are specified, then it will be treated as a configuration

> error.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add,

If neither are specified, then Graceful Node Shutdown feature is disabled.

Author: done

### Risks and Mitigations

Same as the graceful shutdown KEP.

## Design Details

The configuration will be controlled by a new Kubelet Config setting,
`kubeletConfig.PodPriorityShutdownGracePeriods`:

```
type PodPriorityShutdownGracePeriod struct {
	Priority int32

> 	ShutdownGracePeriod metav1.Duration

Reviewer: i think this should include the unit in the field name (seconds)

https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#units

Author: done

[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.

-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

_This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release._

* **How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?**
  - [X] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
    - Feature gate name: `PodPriorityBasedGracefulNodeShutdown`
    - Components depending on the feature gate:
      - `kubelet`
  - [ ] Other
    - Describe the mechanism:
    - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime of the control
      plane?
      - no
    - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning
      of a node? (Do not assume `Dynamic Kubelet Config` feature is enabled).
      - yes (will require restart of kubelet)

* **Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?**
  Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
  automations, so be extremely careful here.

    * The main behavior change is that during a node shutdown, pods running on

>       the node will be terminated gracefully.

Reviewer 3: Is there an upper bound on how long the kubelet will wait?  Do unprivileged pod authors get to choose this value and potentially prevent nodes from shutting down for a very long time?

Author: Yes, it will be bounded. Adding a sentence.

* **Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back
  the enablement)?**
  Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.
  Describe the consequences on existing workloads (e.g., if this is a runtime
  feature, can it break the existing applications?).

>     * Yes, the feature can be disabled by either disabling the feature gate.

Reviewer 3: And this requires restarting the kubelet?  

Do the pods have to be evicted?  Based on quick read, it doesn't seem like we'll have to.

Author: You mean on a node where it is already enabled? One can restart the kubelet with the feature gate turned off without evicting the pods.

    shutdown

## Proposal

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1

*   As a cluster administrator, I can configure the nodes in my cluster to
    allocate different graceful shutdown durations for different pod priority
    value ranges to terminate them gracefully during node shutdown

### Implementation

This implementation builds on top of the node graceful shutdown feature
by introducing additional configuration. A new feature flag called
`PodPriortityBasedGracefulShutdown` will be added to control the behavior
of the kubelet.

We will describe the configuration by using an example. Say, the
following custom pod priority classes are created in a cluster:

|Pod priority class name|Pod priority class value|
|-----------------------|------------------------|
|custom-class-a         | 100000                 |
|custom-class-b         | 10000                  |
|custom-class-c         | 1000                   |
|regular/unset          | 0                      |

We could set kubelet configuration to stop the pods as:

|Pod priority class value|Shutdown period|
|------------------------|---------------|

> | 100000                 |300 seconds    |
> | 10000                  |180 seconds    |
> | 1000                   |120 seconds    |
> | 0                      |60 seconds     |
> 
> The above table implies that any pod with priority value >= 100000 will get
> 300 seconds to stop, any pod with value >= 10000 and < 100000 will get 180
> seconds to stop, any pod with value >= 1000 and < 10000 will get 120 seconds to stop. 
> Finally, all other pods will get 60 seconds to stop.

Reviewer 4: I would illustrate that the shutdown periods don't need to be ordered (assuming that's true)
```suggestion
| 100000                 |10 seconds     |
| 10000                  |180 seconds    |
| 1000                   |120 seconds    |
| 0                      |60 seconds     |

The above table implies that any pod with priority value >= 100000 will get
just 10 seconds to stop, any pod with value >= 10000 and < 100000 will get 180
seconds to stop, any pod with value >= 1000 and < 10000 will get 120 seconds to stop. 
Finally, all other pods will get 60 seconds to stop.
```

Reviewer 4: (this also matches how I'd set up a node - once there are no workload Pods, actually I don't mind if the node shutdown is less than graceful).

Author: Yes, they don't have to be ordered.

Author: Thanks!

Note: We use priority values instead of names because k8s API design discourages
using names and the values are more portable as well.

One doesn't have to specify values corresponding to all of the classes. For
e.g. the config could also be

|Pod priority class value|Shutdown period|
|------------------------|---------------|
| 100000                 |300 seconds    |
| 1000                   |120 seconds    |
| 0                      |60 seconds     |

In the above case, the pods with custom-class-b will go into the same bucket
as custom-class-c for shutdown.

If there are no pods in a particular range, then the kubelet will skip

> over the range entirely.

Reviewer 4: What does “skip over the range entirely” mean? 0-second grace period perhaps?

Author: If we allocate 2 minutes for pods in a 1000 - 10000 range and there are no actual pods then we don't artificially wait for 2 minutes but move on to the next range.

> If there are no pods in a particular range, then the kubelet will skip
> over the range entirely.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If there are no pods in a particular range, then the kubelet does not wait
for pods in that priority range. Instead, the kubelet immediately skips to the
next priority class value range.
```

Author: Accepted, thanks!
